in
modern medicine in Modern science, there's a tendency to identify
consciousness mind and Brain
Make mind a function of the brain
Consciousness a function of the mind and to treat them
chemically and
to alter them
chemically and that well-being is good chemistry of the brain higher consciousness is good chemistry of the brain and
Unhappiness is bad chemistry of the brain nobody is responsible, but we need to change the chemistry to make it better
now
In the yogic thought brain mind and consciousness are three different things
but they're related at a certain level so my questions is sadhguru Ji is the nature of
Brain mind and
Consciousness, how we can use the brain and mind in the proper way without getting stuck in them and the model of healing?
That is based on more consciousness than brain chemistry
In the yogic sciences that is no such thing as brain brain is just body
Like that is a heart like the liver that is a brain. It's just body I
Think this overly exaggerated sense of what is brain
Is coming because as I mentioned it a morning out here?
Our education systems have become purely intellectual
We think intellect is everything that?
Mean I mean I will try to say it in a very brief way
When you say something very complex in a brief way
There will be holes in it, please pick the holes if you find them otherwise okay?
In the yogic system. We are looking at the human mind at sixteen parts
The sixteen parts are in four categories the first one is buddhi. Buddhi means the intellect
Intellect, I am asking you do you want your intellect Sharp or blunt?
You all of you must choose. I'm going to bless you
You want it sharp, so intellect is essentially like a knife
You use a knife to cut things open
This is the nature of the intellect whatever you give it it will dissect
then time modern science is coming out of human intellect, so
Everything is by dissection if you give this flower to the scientist
They will rip it open and see
If you rip it open and see yes of course there are many facts
You will know about the flower only thing is you won't have the flower after that?
and
Now if you really want to know something let's say you really want to get to know your mother please don't dissector
that's not the way it works because
the what you can know by dissection
Is Material aspect of life?
You cannot know life by dissection
only the material and the physical can be dissected
But now we are using our intellect to understand the entire gamut of things
Now we try to dissect
we go on talking about unifying the world and
Unity and enlightenment everything with intellect this is like using a knife to stitch something
If you stitch something with a knife you leave it in tatters
So you are seeing this the more knowledge you gather about something the more?
Misunderstanding and further away from truth. We are becoming not because information is bad because we are trying to stitch with a knife
So intellect is like a knife it must be sharp
it is a survival instrument if you did not have a
Discriminatory intellect you would not be surviving on this planet very very vital
But survival is all that it can do but intellect cannot function
Unless there is a certain volume of memory if you wipe out all your memory
It doesn't matter how whatever you Iq is right now if you take off all your memory you will suddenly look stupid you
May be still intelligent
But you look stupid this how this happens in India people are putting rural children and urban children together and testing them
just because of the volume of information that the urban child has he looks smart a
Rural child looks stupid, but you can put them in real situations
You will see they will come out so smart because their intelligence is fully on
so
Intellect looks smart only when you back it up with lot of information and hence you see information technology
And everybody is mad about information. They are not looking into their phones simply for waste of time
Because only with all that bits and pieces of data
They look smart among their friends in the society in which they live it's only with Data they can look smart without data
They can't do one thing smart. I will just tell you an example
We have two different types of schools one is a modern kind of school where 30% of the children coming from the United States
in India and
Another is a completely traditional school where we teach them only yoga
classical dance classical music color if I to the mother of all martial arts Sanskrit language and English language
They don't go through any academics as such
This is a Few years ago little little ones. They all run to the place to hand wash
Hand washes at this height many of the six seven year olds can't reach
So all this those who are going through modern education. They will go and stand there in a very civilized way wait
for a teacher or somebody to come and put a bench they will climb on the bench and then wash
These other kids ran there the older ones went down the end. Oh and climb on top of them wash and run away
so too much orientation towards intellect and other dimensions of
Intelligence are completely uncultivated today, so the next dimension of the mind is reffered to as ahankara
Which we have completely ignored ahankara does not mean ego as most people are beginning to think it means
Identity what are you identified with?
Because intellect is essentially an instrument to protect the identity that you have taken off if I say
I'm Indian suddenly. It is my intellect makes me think that way makes me willing to live and die for it
you will see just a piece of cloth if you show I
mean a flag
People will have tears in their eyes
Just the identity if you had put them somewhere else and shown another flag the same thing would happen in India Pakistan
It's very very striking because it was one nation and suddenly somebody draw a line and the entire emotion the way it works is
Amazing simply because you got identified with this or that, so intellect is an instrument which protects the identity identity
is that
Instrument which allows the intellect to function in a certain way when I say a certain way
Suppose you're identified just with this "me" as a person
Your intellect will do only this to protecting you all the time
All the time just doing this now
I say my identity is my family
Now your intellect will do everything to protect that or you say a community or race or a religion or a nation?
in the name of Race Religion nation how many things we have done which are utterly idiotic and inhuman but
we do it with great pride because we are identified because this is the nature if we have to continue this analogy if
Intellect is the knife
The hand that holds it is identity
You tell me in handling a knife
Knife is important that it must be sharp
But whether it becomes destructive or productive is determined by the hand that holds it isn't it?
But in today's society in today's world. There is no cultivation of the hand at all
The smaller and smaller identities that we are creating will inevitably cause
Disturbance within the human being and in the world there is no other way right from ancient times
in Eastern cultures
Always we have been taught to I have a cosmic identity. I am brahmasmi
At the age of 12 you must know I am burma's me. This means. I am the cosmos
without identifying with a limitless
Identity no education should be given only after identity is fixed then education
Because without the right kind of identity education becomes destructive
Because you have a limited identity we can say whatever we want
But essentially all crime all a will almost terrible things that we do is just a question of limited identity isn't it?
this is
This is my way that is your way this is my country this your country this my religion is your religion this all it is
So without cultivating the identity we are sharpening the knife we have an unsteady hand
But we are sharpening the knife and arming it with memory. So the next dimension of the mind is called Manus
Which is a silo of memory?
here there are eight dimensions of memory this starts from
Elemental Memory atomic Memory evolutionary Memory
Karmic Memory and
Conscious memory unconscious memory
Articulate memory inarticulate memory like this there are many states of memory as we already looked at this
This body carries the memory of everything that's happened on this planet if you pay enough attention
We can know simply by looking at this how evolution has happened only 150 years ago
Charles Darwin talked about evolution by studying life on the planet
But over 15,000 years ago adI yogi spoke about how life evolved he said first
almost every Indian person is
Knows it but not conscious of it is
the 10 avatars
You must be studying much of it
The first one is fish or water life next one is amphibious
Next one is a mammal next one is half-man half-animal next one is a dwarf man
Next one is a full grown man
But volatile next one is a peaceful man next one is a loving man
Next one is a meditative man next one is supposed to be the mystical man
This is not one man. Story. This is the evolution of life on this planet, so fifteen thousand years ago
Somebody spoke about this by not looking into the microscope
But looking inward because the entire evolutionary story is written here
so the yogic system is focused on this as to how to
Activate different dimensions of memory because without that with limited amount of memory you are bound to act in immature ways
so if your intellect become super capable
Then it's very very important your identity is cosmic
Limitless Identity and
Your memory is evolved that all dimensions of Memory are active
These three function in a certain way some people have evolved it in certain ways
But largely it is happening in a very skewed way too much of intellect and other things are very minimalistic
The fourth Dimension of intelligence is referred to as chitta
This is a dimension of intelligence which is unsullied by memory
See we must understand this we are who we are only because of the memory that we carry
from the color of our skin
To what we identify with what we are whether we are male or female or everything everything is a question of memory
It is the memory stored in this which is deciding all these aspects whether I?
am a human being or some other creature is also question of
Memory is a tremendous possibility, but memory is also a limitation and a boundary
What is you and what is me is right now
The boundary of this is just memory what I remember in my system
And what you remember in your system is
The Boundary so memory is also a boundary memory is the basis of all forms that have happened
There is a certain memory which creates patterns which patterns in turn create physical forms the way
We are the kind of form that we have taken is essentially out of the basic memory that is there never it got
Confused in the sense suppose you and a cow every day start eating mangoes
never it happens that one day by accident or by
Lapse of memory the cow became human or you became a cow
Both of you is the same food every day
But it will not happen because the memory is so strongly instinct at various levels
We are recognizing eight different dimensions of memory
But chitta has no memory no memory means no boundary and intelligence Beyond bounds
in the yogic culture
There is a mischievous way of expressing this we say if you touch your Chitta God will become your slave
Because your intelligence becomes boundless everything becomes within access
So it is very important because this is the first time we must understand
this this is the first time where our survival process is as
Organized as it is today
This is the first time that human beings have so much time to look at things otherwise
Just putting the food together would take 24 hours
Once again in affluent societies. We are going back to the same thing as you said in Montana
Somebody has to work three jobs when so much land is there why do you need to do a job?
To make your food no, because you want to buy it in a Walmart
I'm saying we just kind of twisted the entire thing
For the first time our survival for example today you you go into your superstore
What you need for next one year you can buy bring it home and not step out of your house for the next one year
It's possible never before it was possible to do morning's water if you have to get means you have to walk down to the river
or the pond or something for the first time our
Survival process is so enormous LI organized. This is the time for humanity
This is the time for humanity to explore deeper dimensions of life
you